Human Resources planning is
the foundation for assessing and
understanding the current and future needs
of government departments, agencies,
and the public service as a whole.
Moreover, HR planning is a key
decision-support tool which allows
HR staff to act expeditiously and
in accordance with federal
public service values.
In this section you will learn to
recall the functions of HR planning and
recognize your responsibilities as a manager.
This section should take you
approximately 10 minutes to complete.
Human resources planning is the process
of identifying current and future
human resources needs. When we talk
about HR planning, we are talking about
how an organization identifies and deploys
its workforce to achieve its business
objectives, its mandate, and
high-level government priorities.
HR planning ensures that we have a
well-structured workplace, and can
secure the right people,
build a supportive work environment,
and develop the capacity
to ensure organizational success.
HR planning can help identify
optimal strategies and activities
for a wide variety of important management
components such as recruitment, retention,
learning, development, employee engagement,
talent management, promotion, succession,
employment equity, and official languages.
In short, HR planning is essential to the
continuous improvement of your organization's
capacity to deliver services to Canadians.
Remember to consult an HR advisor when
considering the best ways
to meet your particular business needs.
There are eight functions of effective
HR planning. Done well,
it integrates your organization's
business objectives and reflects business
needs and strong people management practices.
It is based on factual and timely
information about current and future needs
(for example, environmental scans
and employee feedback),
and identifies challenges and key risks
to delivering on priorities,
and outlines options for mitigation.
Effective HR planning should be openly
communicated and foster open and
transparent dialogue that is inclusive
and respectful of diverse perspectives.
Lastly, it establishes processes
for measuring performance and progress toward
the objectives and ties into annual reporting,
succession planning and management.
You might be wondering about your
specific role in this context.
With regard to HR planning,
you have five main responsibilities.
Identifying the qualifications required
for individuals in key positions
to contribute to the success of
organizational priorities.
Communicating the HR plan with
critical and emerging gaps
including succession planning strategies.
Encouraging developmental opportunities
that address gaps.
Linking succession planning strategies
to program and financial planning and
evaluating the effectiveness of the plan
and adapting it as required.
Take what you have learned into real life!
Your organization will have
its own ways of doing things.
HR planning helps organizations to fulfill
their mandate. In some organizations,
an HR plan and the organization's business goals
will be combined to produce
an Integrated HR and business plan.
Take a time out from the course
to locate your organization's HR plan
to better understand how it meets
your business goals and the larger mandate.
Test your knowledge by answering
the following questions.
Select "Submit" when you are done.